BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

Module 2: Study Guide Questions 

1. Given the reaction A+B→C+D and using ∆Go=-RTlnKeq: (Useful calculations: ln1=0, 
ln<1=negative, ln>1=positive.) 
(A) if, at equilibrium, the products concentrations equaled 2M and the reactants 
concentrations equaled 1M, would ∆Go be positive or negative and would this reaction be 
favorable or unfavorable as written?  
(B) if, at equilibrium, the products concentrations equaled 1M and the reactants 
concentrations equaled 2M, would ∆Go be positive or negative and would this reaction be 
favorable or unfavorable as written?  
(C) What does 𝜟G° tell you about the reactants, A and B and the products, C and D?
(D) What else do you need to know to determine if this reaction is favorable in a cell? 

2. Draw free energy change diagrams (G vs. Reaction plot) for the following: 𝜟G < 0, 𝜟G > 0,
𝜟G = 0 for reaction X→Y.

3.  Describe an experiment to determine how and if cells obey the second law of 
thermodynamics.  Include  
(A) what the second law of thermodynamics states,  
(B) a description of the experiment, and  
(C) the results and how they indicate whether cells obey this law. 

4.  Consider the reaction equation for hydrolysis of ATP:   ATP + H20        ADP + Pi + H+. 
What determines whether this reaction is favorable in a cell?  Your description should be in 
terms of  
(A) Greaction = G˚ + RTlnK   
(B) intrinsic properties, and  
(C) system properties. 

5.  𝜟G° of a chemical reaction is dependent on the enthalpy and entropy of the products and
the reactants. 
(A)  Describe the thermodynamic laws that pertain to enthalpy and entropy. 
(B)  Using the jumping bean analogy, describe how enthalpy and entropy determine if a 
reaction is favorable or unfavorable as written. 
(C)  Using the equation 𝜟G° = 𝜟H - T𝜟S and bar graphs (described in class) to describe their
role in determining if a reaction is spontaneous as written. 

6.  Given that 𝜟Greaction = 𝜟G˚ + RTlnK and using the jumping bean analogy,
(A)  describe the role of Keq and K in determining if a reaction is spontaneous as written. 
(B)  What is the relative (<. >, = 1) ratio of products to reactants at equilibrium and under 
cellular conditions for ATP hydrolysis? 
(C)  Using the table in the slides for lecture 5, what would be the 𝜟G˚ and 𝜟Greaction for
reactions with [B]/[A] ratios at equilibrium and starting conditions, respectively, of 103, 101, 1, 10-
1 and 10-3? 

Page 1 of 3 

BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

7.  Many reactions that a cell must have occur to live and grow are thermodynamically 
unfavorable. 
(A)  What is meant by thermodynamically unfavorable? 
(B)  How do cells “drive” these reactions to occur? 
(C)  How is glutamine synthesis from glutamate and NH4
thermodynamically and mechanistically? 

+ (𝜟G˚ = 4 kcal/mole) driven in cells

8.  Instant cold packs get cold when the contents, usually solid urea and liquid water, are 
mixed, producing an aqueous solution of urea.  Although this process is clearly spontaneous, 
the products are colder than the reactants.  Explain how this is possible in terms of the 
difference between 𝜟G and 𝜟H.

9.  Rank the following bonds or interactions in order of strength: hydrogen bond, covalent 
bond, ionic bond, and van der Waals interaction.  What typical strengths (𝜟G˚) of these
bonds/interactions in kcal/mole?  How does the environment (e.g. water vs. vacuum) affect 
each type of bond/interaction? 

10.  True or false: All single, non-covalent bonds or interactions are too weak to withstand the 
thermal motions (~1 kcal/mole) that tend to pull interacting molecules apart. 

11.  Which type of non-covalent interaction is favored by (in fact, dependent on) an aqueous 
environment and strengthened by the presence of added ions? 

12.  Briefly describe that key attributes of the four types of non-covalent 
bonds/interactions/forces. 

13.  Explain the fact that ethanol (CH3CH2OH) is more soluble in water than is ethane (CH3CH3).  

14.  For each of the pairs below, which is the conjugate base. 

1a. RCOOH 1b. RCOO–

2a. RNH2 2b. RNH3+

3a. H2PO4– 3b. H3PO4

4a. H2CO3 4b. HCO3–

15.  Phosphoric acid (H3PO4) has three dissociable protons, with the pKa’s shown below.  Which 
form of phosphoric acid predominates in a solution at pH 4?  Explain your answer. 

Acid 

H3PO4   

H2PO4–  

HPO4

2–  

pKa 

2.14 

6.86 

12.4 

Page 2 of 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

16.  Define pKa for a weak acid in the following two ways:  (a) in relation to its acid dissociation
constant, Ka, and (b) by reference to a titration curve for the weak acid.

17.  Describe the key aspects of the shared common structure between the 20 common 
amino acids. 

18.  Amino acids classification:

a. What are the three main classifications of amino acids discussed in class?

b. Describe any sub-classifications of these three main classifications.

c. What portion of each amino acid determines how it is classified?

d. Provide an example for each class of amino acid.

19.  Amino acids and solubility, pH, and pKa:

a. Why are most amino acids soluble in water?

b. Are amino acids weak or strong acids and bases?

c. At what pH does glycine have a net charge of -1?

d. What is the net charge of glycine at its pI?

e. Is the pKa of the amino and carboxyl groups of all amino acids the same?

20.  Draw the structures of the amino acids phenylalanine and aspartate in the ionization state 
you would expect at pH 7.0 on a piece of paper. Why is aspartate very soluble in water, whereas
phenylalanine is much less soluble?

21. The amino acid histidine has three ionizable groups, with pKa values of 1.8, 6.0, and 9.2.   

a. Which pKa corresponds to the histidine side chain?  

b. Which functional groups are the other pKas for?  

c. In a solution at pH 5.4, will more than half, less than half, or exactly 
half of the histidine side chains carry a positive charge?  

d. What will be the overall net charge of the histidine molecules after addition of 2 OH- 
equivalents?   

e. Which of the three diagrams represents the titration curve on a pH vs. NaOH equivalents 
plot?   

f. Which of the four diagrams represents the protonation state of the histidine functional groups 
at this net charge? 

Page 3 of 3 

 
